---
title: 'Chemistry in Cosmos'
date: '2021-10-03'
image: chemistry-in-cosmos.png
excerpt: Humans have shared a curious relationship with the sun, stars, and many objects in the sky for ages. Humans also used the sky for navigation, cultivation of crops, keeping track of time and have been trying to understand celestial objects from the time unknown. In this voyage of humans, they have also started to analyze...
isFeatured: true
---

Humans have shared a curious relationship with the sun, stars, and many objects in the sky for ages. Humans also used the sky for navigation, cultivation of crops, keeping track of time and have been trying to understand celestial objects from the time unknown. In this voyage of humans, they have also started to analyze the composition of known substances in celestial objects. This is the study of the chemical composition of matter in the universe and the processes that led to those compositions called Cosmochemistry or Chemical cosmology. Now, let’s dive into the article to know more about this exciting field of Chemistry.

The study of the astronomical objects for chemical composition started in 1938 when Victor Goldschmidt, a Norwegian chemist and his group of colleagues, pioneered to compile the list of “cosmic abundances” based on the analysis of both meteorites and terrestrial rocks. He had justified that his study of meteorites gives accurate figures as terrestrial rocks wither away due to the action of air. Later in 1950, Harold Urey coined the term “Cosmochemistry” and is considered “Father of Cosmochemistry.” He has engaged in research that eventually led to an understanding of the origin of the elements and the chemical abundance of stars. In 1956, Urey, along with his colleague, German scientist Hans Suess, published the first table of cosmic abundances to include isotopes based on the analysis of meteorites.

The refinement of analytical instrumentation in the 1960s, significantly that of mass spectrometry, has allowed chemical cosmologists to perform a very detailed analysis of the isotopic abundances of elements found in the composition of meteorites. In the year 1960, John Reynolds determined, through the study of nuclides in meteorites, that the solar system elements were formed before the solar system itself, which has helped establish a timeline of the processes that occurred in the early solar system.

Recently, in 2011, scientists reported that cosmic dust contains complex organic matter created naturally and rapidly by stars. Again in 2012, the researchers from the Copenhagen University of Denmark have said that they have detected a specific sugar molecule, glycolaldehyde, in a distant, binary star system located 400 light-years from Earth. Glycolaldehyde is needed to form ribonucleic acid, or RNA, which is similar in function to DNA. Thus, we can infer that complex organic molecules may form in stellar systems prior to starting planets, eventually arriving on young planets early in their formation. The recent research results show that the traces of isotopes of many elements like Beryllium, Aluminium and radioactive elements like Rhenium and Osmium and many other elements are found vastly in many families of meteorites like chondrites and achondrites and Interplanetary Dust Particles (IDPs).

In September 2012, scientists reported that polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, also known as PAHs, when subjected to interstellar medium (ISM) conditions, are transformed through various reactions like hydrogenation and oxygenation hydroxylation to more complex organic compounds. Further, as a result of these transformations, the PAHs are observed to lose their spectroscopic signature, which could be one of the reasons for the lack of detection of PAH in interstellar ice grains, particularly in the outer regions of cold, dense clouds, known as Oort clouds or the upper molecular layers of protoplanetary disks.
Finally, we can conclude that the field of Cosmochemistry is vast, and very significant research is happening in this new and dynamic field. Chemists are playing a preeminent role in the Space Odyssey of Human history.