---
title: 'Faster, Higher, Stronger – The Chemistry of Sports'
date: '2021-10-03'
image: chemazine-sports.jpg
excerpt: Ma'am, we have a free period. Can we go play? Mom, I am done with my homework. Can I go play? Took you right down memory lane, didn't it? We all are familiar with the thrill of watching intense matches, the feeling of having conquered the world during the nights our parents made an exception...
isFeatured: true
---

Ma’am, we have a free period. Can we go play? “Mom, I am done with my homework. Can I go play?” Took you right down memory lane, didn’t it? We all are familiar with the thrill of watching intense matches, the feeling of having conquered the world during the nights our parents made an exception so that we could watch the world cup, shouting at an inanimate object and then feeling foolish and what not. Regardless of being a sportsman, the topic of sports invokes such intense feelings that we get lost in the moment. Hence it is a popular icebreaker and, well, honestly, sometimes a friendship breaker too.

Well, you may be wondering what chemistry has got to do with sports. Growing up, you may have had many questions about why the pool is green, why the tennis ball we use to play street cricket is not used in professional cricket matches, etc. Sadly, chemistry may not be able to answer “Who is better, Messi or Ronaldo?” but it definitely can answer the above questions!

Seeing the pristine blue pools on television and then seeing the questionable green color of the water of our local swimming pool, we all have been disappointed. We have questioned, what makes the water green? Why does my eye burn? Let’s dive right into answering the questions with the help of chemistry. The water in the pool is disinfected with chlorine. Chlorine acts as a disinfectant that helps eliminate the bacteria and the algae present in the pool. Chlorine also helps clear the pool of unwanted material and dust by oxidizing it, i.e. chemically destroying the substances. Chlorine is usually used in its solid form since its gaseous state is toxic and requires much regulation. And to answer why your eyes sting, chlorine reacts with the nitrogen present in the urine to form chloramine, which causes redness and irritation. Gross right!

When the weightlifters apply chalk and then dust their hands, it’s a move we all find super cool, but did you know the real reason behind it? Gym chalk is magnesium carbonate which has a grainy texture that helps you have a proper grip on the weights. It does so by soaking up the moisture and oils on the palms of your hands, and it also helps prevent skin tears. Gunpowder is another powder used in the popular sport of rifle shooting. It is composed of potassium nitrate, charcoal and sulfur. Charcoal and sulfur act as fuel, though sulfur can undergo exothermic reactions at low temperatures, making it feasible. Lastly, potassium nitrate acts as a source of oxygen(at high temperatures) for the reaction.

While browsing through the beverage section at the supermarket, one distinctive blue drink has always caught our eye. Yes, I am talking about the beloved Gatorade, a popular liquid labeled a “sports drink.” So what makes its constitution so different from other drinks? Why is it so popular among athletes? And why does it give us that energy boost? These are beverages high in carbohydrate content which help replenish the water lost during exercise while providing energy. Sports drinks contain electrolytes (generally magnesium, sodium, calcium, chlorides etc.) which fill up on the lost fluids which your body loses via sweat while exercising. These drinks also contain carbohydrates that provide you with much-needed energy and sweeteners that help regulate your blood sugar levels. Sports drinks also help maintain the hydration ratio your body needs as you sweat out while playing.

Chemistry also plays an essential role in the selection of materials for various sports equipment, which makes playing these sports a lot easier. The fibers the tennis racquets are made of, the fabric of swimwear, the polycarbonate used in helmets and protecting gears are all carefully devised on the studies made by experimenting on different materials by material scientists.

“All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy.” We all are familiar with this quote, having used it in countless speeches or essays, but now you know that chemists’ work does help make sports easier and an enjoyable experience for all.
